[Music]
what are the limits to computing power
aside from the physical limitations
imposed by science theater is limited in
its memory and processing speed for
example are there theoretical limits
imposed by say mathematics the quantum
physicist and philosopher David Deutsch
writes about what he has described as
can't gotyou environments imagine a
super powerful computer of the future
[Music]
imagine further that this computer is to
be used as a virtual reality simulator
at the present point in time virtual
reality is still very experimental
around a decade or so ago it was all the
rage and it seemed that soon we will be
able to Don a helmet and be suddenly
transported to a computer-generated
world which we would be unable to tell
was fake because the graphics would be
so clear a sound so crisp and other
sensations so vivid as to completely
fool our senses into believing that we
really were somewhere else this would
apparently make holidaying far cheaper
common boffins I want my virtual trip to
Argentina
[Music]
of course the reality of virtual reality
hasn't yet lived up to the promise that
aside
Deutsch wonders if in the future virtual
reality machines could be effectively
unlimited in their ability to render any
logically possible environment there is
a distinction to be made here between
what is physically possible and what is
logically possible something which is
physically possible is something that is
permitted to occur by the laws of
physics that is something which does not
require you to say use up all of the
available energy in the universe or
travel beyond the speed of light on the
other hand something which is logically
possible like say running faster than
light is certainly logically possible
it's just that it's not physically
possible
now all physically possible environments
can be programmed into a virtual reality
generator so for example we could
program a sufficiently powerful computer
to simulate what it would be like to
have a civilization on Mars or to travel
across the galaxy
these physically possible scenarios
would be straightforward to dial into a
supercomputer acting as a virtual
reality machine they don't after all
transgress any laws of physics but what
about all logically possible
environments Deutsch uses a very clever
argument this argument was first put
forward by Gian cantle but was also used
by a girdle and cheering and their
proofs about the limits of mathematics
and computation the argument used is
known as a diagonal argument and goes
like this
imagine you have a computer from the far
distant future it's as powerful as you
like with almost unlimited memory and
processing speed as fast as light it can
render environments that are finite in
terms of the space and time that they
represent or even infinite a
representation of infinite space by a
computer is a fairly straightforward
process even today and if you play some
computer games you'll know what I mean
you can walk away from the action and
just keep going off into the blue yonder
one need only program
simulation with what is effectively a
loop of space what are the limitations
in rendering virtual reality
environments even given the most
powerful supercomputer of the future
other environments that it cannot even
in principle hope to create it turns out
that there are imagined at the number of
logically possible environments is
infinite
as in fact it is imagined that our
supercomputer can render an infinite set
of logically possible environments
imagine further that these possible
environments are written down in a list
like environment one environment to
environment 3 and so on you get the
picture ad infinitum covering all the
possible environments that our computer
can recreate we have a listening
environment one environment to
environment 3 and so on of all the
possible environments that our virtual
reality simulator can generate even if
this list is infinite and it is there
are still environments and infinity of
them actually that the computer cannot
render like what well consider the
following environment for the first 5
minutes it's different to environment 1
and for the second five minutes it's
different to environment too and for the
third five minutes
oh you guessed it it's different to
environment three and so on now because
it's different to environment one for
the first five minutes
it cannot be environment one because
it's different to environment two it
cannot be environment two for similar
reasons that cannot be environments
three four or five or any environment
now lists and yet we created our list by
saying that it not only contained the
set of all environments that could be
rendered by the computer but also that
the list was infinite despite the list
being infinite it cannot contain
everything logically possible this
diagonal argument establishes that there
are limits to computation that there are
certain things a computer cannot do in
this case in terms of creating virtual
reality environments there's certain
environments that it can't actually
recreate even if they're logically
possible but more importantly diagonal
arguments in general illustrate
limitations of mathematics and
computation more generally it also
suggests that certain kinds of infinity
are bigger than others in this case the
infinite set of all environments that
can be rendered by a supercomputer is
certainly smaller than the infinite set
of all environments that it can render
plus the ones it cannot
I hope you've enjoyed this top cast
episode which is part of a series on the
nature of mathematics and computation
try downloading some of the others from
the website and I'll see you again soon
[Music]